[IMP] accounting/l10n_pe: delivery guide 2.0 peru (#7598)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/peru.rst

.. important::
   It is important to check the :guilabel:`Is M1 or L?` checkbox if the vehicle has less than four
   wheels or less than eight seats.

.. image:: peru/vehicle-not-m1-or-l-pe.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Vehicle not selected as an M1 or L type with extra fields shown.

Products
********

To configure the available products, navigate to :menuselection:`Inventory --> Products` and open
the product to be configured.

Make sure that the applicable information in the product form is fully configured. The
:guilabel:`Partida Arancelaria` (Tariff Item) field needs to be completed.

Generating a GRE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the delivery from inventory is created during the sales workflow, make sure you complete the
|GRE| fields on the top-right section of the transfer form for the fields:

- :guilabel:`Transport Type`
- :guilabel:`Reason for Transfer`
- :guilabel:`Departure start date`

It is also required to complete the :guilabel:`Vehicle` and :guilabel:`Operator` fields under the
:guilabel:`Guia de Remision PE` tab.

The Delivery transfer has to be marked as *Done* for the :guilabel:`Generar Guia de Remision` button
to appear on the left menu of the transfer form.

> 

Author: Hello @samueljlieber  is it possible we can add the image generate_GRE_transferview.png after this section? If it was taken out due to a lot of screenshots it is better to have this one instead of the gre-delivery-slip.png, Let me know!

you can also create debit Notes. For this just use the button “Add Debit Note”.

By default the Debit Note is set in the document type.

> Guia de Remision Remitente 2.0
> ------------------------------

Reviewer: Update to sentence case
```suggestion
Guia de remision remitente 2.0
------------------------------
```

> The Guía de Remisión Electrónica (Delivery Guide) is an electronic document generated by the 

Reviewer: Add formatting, acronym, and remove parenthesis
```suggestion
The *Guía de Remisión Electrónica* (GRE) delivery guide is an electronic document generated by the
```

shipper to support the transportation or transfer of goods from one place to another, such 
as a warehouse or establishment. In Odoo, there are several steps needed in configurations 
before you can successfully use this feature.

> This guide is meant to be an all encompassing reference regarding this feature.

Reviewer: Can be removed since this documentation implies this
```suggestion
```

> Its use is mandatory and required by SUNAT for taxpayers who need to transfer their products, 
> with the exception of those under the Single Simplified Regime (Régimen Único Simplificado, or RUS).

Reviewer: Add context and improve formatting
```suggestion
The use of the guía de remisión electrónica electronic document is mandatory and required by SUNAT
for taxpayers who need to transfer their products, with the exception of those under the
*Single Simplified Regime* (régimen único simplificado or RUS).
```

> Delivery Guide Types
> ********************
> 
> Sender's Delivery Guide
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: Adjust headings and character order 
```suggestion
Delivery guide types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sender
******
```

> - Issued by the *owner* of the goods (i.e. the sender) at the *beginning* of the shipment.  
> - This type of Delivery Guide is issued when a sale is made, a service is rendered (including processing), 
> goods are assigned for use or goods are transferred between premises of the same company and others. 
> - Learn more `here <https://www.gob.pe/7899-guia-de-remision>`_.
> - Included in Odoo.

Reviewer: Improve formatting of this content
```suggestion
The *Sender* delivery guide type is issued when a sale is made, a service is rendered (including
processing), goods are assigned for use or goods are transferred between premises of the same
company and others.

This delivery guide is issued by the owner of the goods (i.e. the sender) at the beginning of the
shipment.

.. note::
   The sender delivery guide is supported in Odoo.

.. seealso::
   `SUNAT guía de remisión <https://www.gob.pe/7899-guia-de-remision>`_
```

> Carrier’s Delivery Guide
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> 
> - It is issued by the *carrier* and must be issued by *each shipper* when the 
> *shipment is by public transport*. 
> - While the Sender’s Delivery Guide is a document that justifies the shipment of products 
> (and issued by the sender), the Carrier Delivery Guide justifies the transportation service performed by the driver (or carrier). 
> - Learn more `here <https://tefacturo.pe/blog/sunat/guia-de-remision-electronica/guia-de-remision-transportista/>`_. 
> - *Not included in Odoo*.

Reviewer: Heading fix and improved content formatting
```suggestion
Carrier
*******

The *Carrier* delivery guide type justifies the transportation service performed by the driver (or
carrier).

This delivery guide is issued by the carrier and must be issued to each shipper when the shipment
goes through public transport.

.. important::
   The carrier delivery guide is **not** supported in Odoo.

.. seealso::
   `SUNAT guía de remisión transportista
   <https://tefacturo.pe/blog/sunat/guia-de-remision-electronica/guia-de-remision-transportista/>`_
```

> Transportation Types
> ********************
> 
> Private
> ^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transportation types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Private
*******
```

> This option is used when the transfer of **goods is carried out by the owner themself** with 
> their own vehicles. For this case, a Sender’s Delivery Guide must be issued. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Private* transportation type option is used when the transfer of goods is carried out by the
owner with their own vehicles. In this case, a sender's delivery guide must be issued.
```

Public

> ^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
******
```

> This option is used when the **goods are moved by an external carrier**. In this case, 
> two Delivery Guides must be issued; the Sender’s Delivery Guide and the Carrier’s Delivery Guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This *Public* transportation type option is used when the goods are moved by an external carrier. In
this case, two delivery guides must be issued; the sender's delivery guide and the carrier's
delivery guide.
```

> Changes in Version 2.0
> **********************

Reviewer: Update heading order, and add an introduction to this section
```suggestion
Changes in version 2.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes have been made in the version 2.0 of the :abbr:`GRE (Guía de Remisión
Electrónica)` delivery guide.
```

> Direct Submission to SUNAT
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Direct submission to SUNAT
**************************
```

> The creation of the GRE (Delivery Guide) in Odoo **must be sent directly to the SUNAT** regardless 
> of the electronic document provider: IAP, Digiflow or SUNAT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The creation of the :abbr:`GRE (Guía de Remisión Electrónica)` delivery guide in Odoo **must** be
sent directly to the SUNAT, regardless of the electronic document provider: IAP, Digiflow or SUNAT.
```

> New Required Information
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New required information
************************
```

> Version 2.0 requires additional information in the general configuration as well as vehicles, contacts, 
> and products. In the general configurations, it will be necessary to add new credentials that 
> are acquired in the SUNAT portal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version 2.0 requires additional information in the general configuration as well as vehicles,
contacts, and products. In the general configurations, it is now necessary to add new credentials
that are acquired in the SUNAT portal.
```

Flow
****

.. image:: peru/peru_flow_remision.png
   :align: center 
   :alt: Flow for Guia de Remision emission

>    

Reviewer: @masi-odoo this section needs written content. An image should not be used in place of written instructions, can you please add instructions here?

Cancellations

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*************
```

> Currently, the SUNAT no longer uses the term *“Anula”*, but now uses the term *“Dar de baja”*. 
> Therefore, **both** the sender and the carrier can cancel the electronic waybill, *so long as 
> the following conditions are met*: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the SUNAT no longer uses the term "Anula", but now uses the term "Dar de baja" for
cancellations. Therefore, **both** the sender and the carrier can cancel the electronic waybill, so
long as the following conditions are met:
```

> - If the shipment has not yet been initiated
> - If the shipment has been initiated, but the receiver must be changed before reaching 
> the final destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The shipment has not been initiated.
- If the shipment has been initiated, the receiver **must** be changed before reaching the final
  destination.
```

Testing

> ^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*******
```

> The SUNAT did not release any test environment; **this means that any Delivery Guides that 
> were generated by mistake will be sent to the SUNAT**.
> 
> If by mistake the Waybill was created in this environment, it will be necessary to be deleted 
> from the SUNAT portal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SUNAT did not release a test environment. This means that any delivery guides that were
generated by mistake **will** be sent to the SUNAT.

If by mistake the waybill was created in this environment, it is necessary to delete it from the
SUNAT portal.
```

> Odoo Configuration
> ******************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> .. important::
>    - Electronic Sender’s Waybill is currently the only supported type of Waybill in Odoo.
>    - The delivery guide is dependant on the **Inventory App**, the `l10n_pe_edi` and 
> `l10n_pe` modules.

Reviewer: Update and condense **important** admonitions
```suggestion
.. important::
  - Electronic sender's waybill is currently the only supported type of waybill in Odoo.
   - The delivery guide is dependant on the Odoo *Inventory* app, the :guilabel:`l10n_pe_edi` and
     :guilabel:`l10n_pe` modules.
   - A second user **must** be added for the creation of electronic documents.
```

> After following the steps to configure the :doc:`Electronic invoicing <accounting_settings>` 
> and the :doc:`Master data <configura_master_data>`, go to **Apps**, **clear** any default 
> filters set, search for the `l10n_pe_edi_stock_20` module and click the *Activate* button.
> 
> Next, you will need to *obtain* the Client ID and Client Secret. To do this, follow the 
> instructions in this `link <https://cpe.sunat.gob.pe/sites/default/files/inline-files/Manual_Servicios_GRE.pdf>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After following the steps to configure the :ref:`electronic invoicing <peru/accounting-settings>`
and the :ref:`master data <peru/master_data>`, navigate to :menuselection:`Apps` and clear any
default filters set. Search for the `l10n_pe_edi_stock_20` module and click the :guilabel:`Activate`
button.

Next, you will need to obtain the *client ID* and *client secret* from SUNAT. To do so, follow the
`manual de servicios web plataforma nueva GRE
<https://cpe.sunat.gob.pe/sites/default/files/inline-files/Manual_Servicios_GRE.pdf>`_.
```

Reviewer: Add `.. _peru/master_data:` and `.. _peru/accounting-settings:` custom anchors above section headings for :ref:s

> .. important::
>    Keep in mind, you must generate a second user for electronic document creation of 
> electronic documents.
>   
> To obtain the Client ID / Secret, enter the **SUNAT Portal**, and look in the “SOL” 
> menu for the **SUNAT API Credentials Management** section:
> 
> .. image:: peru/menu_api_sunat.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: SUNAT API credential management
> 
> Make sure you select the checkbox related to the **GRE issuance of receipts** and 
> the **Desktop** option in the *scope* section and save the setting:
> 
> .. image:: peru/configuration_api_sunat.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: API Credentials registration
> 
> .. important::
>    Make sure you save and accept the changes so the credentials are updated on 
> the SUNAT portal
> 
> .. image:: peru/configuration_api_sunat_confirmation.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: API Credentials registration confirmation

Reviewer: This section can likely be removed since it is repeating the linked [manual de servicios web plataforma nueva GRE](https://cpe.sunat.gob.pe/sites/default/files/inline-files/Manual_Servicios_GRE.pdf) instructions, no need to document instructions in a 3rd party PDF in Odoo documentation.
```suggestion
```

> These credentials should be used to configure the delivery guide general 
> settings following :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings --> Peruvian Electronic Invoicing` 
> and filling the *Sunat Delivery Guide API* section:
> 
> .. image:: peru/sunat_delivery_guide_settings.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: Flow for Guia de Remision emission
> 
> .. note::
>    In the SUNAT portal, it is **important to have the correct access rights 
> enabled** as it may differ from the user set in the first section for Electronic Invoicing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::
   In the SUNAT portal, it is important to have the correct access rights enabled as it may differ
   from the user set for electronic invoicing.

These credentials should be used to configure the delivery guide general settings from
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings --> Peruvian Electronic Invoicing`
and filling the :guilabel:`Sunat Delivery Guide API` section.

.. image:: peru/sunat_delivery_guide_settings.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Flow for Guia de Remision emission
```

> .. warning::
>    For the field **Guide SOL User** It is required to follow the format 
> ‘RUC + UsuarioSol’ (depending on the user selected when generating the 
> GRE API Credentials in the SUNAT portal). For example: `20557912879SOLUSER`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::
   It is required to follow the format `RUC + UsuarioSol` (e.g `20557912879SOLUSER`) for the
   :guilabel:`Guide SOL User` field, depending on the user selected when generating the :abbr:`GRE
   (Guía de Remisión Electrónica)` API credentials in the SUNAT portal.
```

.. image:: peru/GRE_fields_example.png
   :align: center 
   :alt: Example for the SUNAT Delivery Guide API section configuration

> Operator, Carrier, and Vehicle Configuration
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operator
********
```

> The *Operator* is the driver of the vehicle in the case that the delivery 
> guide is done with a *private transport*. 
> 
> To create a new operator go to :menuselection:`Contacts --> Create` and 
> fill out the contact information, specifically:
> 
> - Select *Individual* as the **company type** option.
> - Add the *Operator License* in the **Accounting tab** in the contact form.
> 
> In the customer address, make sure you complete the following:
> 
> - The District field 
> - Tax ID (DNI/RUC)
> - Tax ID Number
> 
> .. image:: peru/operator_configuration.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: Individual type operator configurations in the Contact form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *operator* is the driver of the vehicle in cases where the delivery guide is through *private*
transport.

To create a new operator, navigate to :menuselection:`Contacts --> Create` and fill out the contact
information.

First, select :guilabel:`Individual` as the :guilabel:`Company Type`. Then, add the
:guilabel:`Operator License` in the :guilabel:`Accounting` tab of the contact form.

For the customer address, make sure the following are complete:

- The :guilabel:`District` field
- :guilabel:`Tax ID` (DNI/RUC)
- :guilabel:`Tax ID Number`

.. image:: peru/operator_configuration.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Individual type operator configurations in the Contact form
```

> 
> The *Carrier* is used in the case where the delivery guide will be 
> done using *public transport*.
> 
> To create a new operator go to :menuselection:`Contacts --> Create` 
> and fill out the contact information, specifically:
> 
> - *Company* selected as the **company type** option
> - MTC Registration Number
> - Authorization Issuing Entity
> - Authorization Number
> 
> In the company address, make sure you complete the following:
> 
> - The District field 
> - Tax ID (DNI/RUC)
> - Tax ID Number
> 
> .. image:: peru/company_operator_configuration.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt:  Company type operator configurations in the Contact form

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Carrier
*******

The *carrier* is used in the case where the delivery guide is through *public* transport.

To create a new carrier, navigate to :menuselection:`Contacts --> Create` and fill out the contact
information.

First, select :guilabel:`Company` as the :guilabel:`Company Type`. Then, add the :guilabel:`MTC
Registration Number`, :guilabel:`Authorization Issuing Entity`, and the :guilabel:`Authorization
Number`.

For the company address, make sure the following are complete:

- The :guilabel:`District` field
- :guilabel:`Tax ID` (DNI/RUC)
- :guilabel:`Tax ID Number`

.. image:: peru/company_operator_configuration.png
   :align: center
   :alt:  Company type operator configurations in the Contact form
```

> To configure your available *Vehicles* go to :menuselection:`Inventory App --> Configuration --> Vehicles`, 
> it is important to check the `Is M1 or L?` if the vehicle has less than 4 wheels or less than 8 seats.
> 
> .. image:: peru/vehicle_m1_or_L_pe.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: Vehicle selected as an M1 or L type
>    
> If that is not the case, be sure to fulfill the rest of the information 
> needed for the vehicle.
> 
> .. image:: peru/vehicle_not_M1_or_L_pe.png
>    :align: center 
>    :alt: Vehicle not selected as an M1 or L type with extra fields shown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vehicles
********

To configure the available vehicles, navigate to :menuselection:`Inventory --> Configuration -->
Vehicles`. It is important to check the :guilabel:`Is M1 or L?` checkbox if the vehicle has less
than 4 wheels or less than 8 seats.

.. image:: peru/vehicle_m1_or_L_pe.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Vehicle selected as an M1 or L type

If that is not the case, be sure to fulfill the rest of the information needed for the vehicle.

.. image:: peru/vehicle_not_M1_or_L_pe.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Vehicle not selected as an M1 or L type with extra fields shown
```

> Product Configuration
> *********************
> 
> Make sure that the applicable information in the product form is fully 
> configured. The *“Partida Arancelaria” (Tariff Item)* the field needs to be filled. 
> 
> To do this, go to :menuselection:`Inventory App --> Products` open the 
> product to be configured and fill the “Partida Arancelaria” field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Products
********

To configure the available products, navigate to :menuselection:`Inventory --> Products` and open
the product to be configured.

Make sure that the applicable information in the product form is fully configured. The
:guilabel:`Partida Arancelaria` (Tariff Item) field needs to be completed.
```

Common Errors
*************

- `Diferente prefijo para productos (T001 en algunos, T002 en otros)`: At the moment,
Odoo does not support the automation of prefixes for products. This can be done 
manually for each product output. This can be done as well for non-storable products, 
however keep in mind that there will be no traceability.

- `2325 - GrossWeightMeasure - El dato no cumple con el formato establecido "Hace 
falta el campo" "Peso"" en el producto`: This error occurs when the weight on the 
product is set as “0.00”. To fix, you will need to cancel the Waybill and recreate 
it. Make sure that you fix the weight on the product before creating the new 
Waybill, or it will throw you the same error.

- `JSONDecodeError: Expecting value: line 1 column 1 (char 0) when creating a Delivery 
Guide`: This error is typically generated due to SOL user issues. Verify the user’s 
connection with the SUNAT; the SOL user must be established with the company RUT + user ID.
Example: 2012188549JOHNSMITH

- `El número de documento relacionado al traslado de mercancía no cumple con el formato 

> establecido : error: documento relacionado: The “Related Document Type” and “Related Document Number”

Author: ```suggestion
establecido:` error: documento relacionado: The “Related Document Type” and “Related Document Number”
```

> Common Errors
> *************
> 
> - `Diferente prefijo para productos (T001 en algunos, T002 en otros)`: At the moment,
> Odoo does not support the automation of prefixes for products. This can be done 
> manually for each product output. This can be done as well for non-storable products, 
> however keep in mind that there will be no traceability.
> 
> - `2325 - GrossWeightMeasure - El dato no cumple con el formato establecido "Hace 
> falta el campo" "Peso"" en el producto`: This error occurs when the weight on the 
> product is set as “0.00”. To fix, you will need to cancel the Waybill and recreate 
> it. Make sure that you fix the weight on the product before creating the new 
> Waybill, or it will throw you the same error.
> 
> - `JSONDecodeError: Expecting value: line 1 column 1 (char 0) when creating a Delivery 
> Guide`: This error is typically generated due to SOL user issues. Verify the user’s 
> connection with the SUNAT; the SOL user must be established with the company RUT + user ID.
> Example: 2012188549JOHNSMITH
> 
> - `El número de documento relacionado al traslado de mercancía no cumple con el formato 
> establecido : error: documento relacionado: The “Related Document Type” and “Related Document Number”
> fields only apply to Invoices and Receipts.
> 
> - `400 Client error: Bad Request for URL`: This error is not solvable on Odoo’s side; 
> it is advised you reach out to the SUNAT and verify the user. It may be necessary to 
> create a new user.
> 
> - `Invalid content was found starting with element 'cac:BuyerCustomerParty'`: This 
> error occurs when the transfer reason is set as “other”. Please select another option. 
> According to the official documentation of the SUNAT’s Waybill Guide, the transfer
> reason 03 (sale with shipment to third party) or 12 (others) will not work correctly
> in Odoo, since you should not put an “empty” or “blank” customer.
> 
> - `Duda cliente: consumo de créditos IAP al usar GRE 2.0`: For live clients using 
> IAP: No credit is consumed (in theory) because it does not go through the OSE, i.e.
> these documents are directly sent to the SUNAT.
> 
> - `Errores con formato credenciales GRE 2.0 (traceback error)`: Odoo currently throws
> an error with a traceback, instead of a message that the credentials are not correctly
> configured in the database. If this occurs on your database, please verify your credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- `Diferente prefijo para productos (T001 en algunos, T002 en otros)`

  At the moment, Odoo does not support the automation of prefixes for products. This can be done
  manually for each product output. This can be done as well for non-storable products, however
  keep in mind that there will be no traceability.
- `2325 - GrossWeightMeasure - El dato no cumple con el formato establecido "Hace falta el campo"
  "Peso"" en el producto`

  This error occurs when the weight on the product is set as `0.00`. To fix this, you will need to
  cancel the waybill and recreate it. Make sure that you fix the weight on the product before
  creating the new waybill, or it will result in the same error.
- `JSONDecodeError: Expecting value: line 1 column 1 (char 0) when creating a Delivery Guide`

  This error is typically generated due to SOL user issues. Verify the user's connection with the
  SUNAT; the SOL user must be established with the company RUT + user ID. For example:
  `2012188549JOHNSMITH`.
- `El número de documento relacionado al traslado de mercancía no cumple con el formato establecido
  : error: documento relacionado`

  The *Related Document Type* and *Related Document Number* fields only apply to invoices and
  receipts.
- `400 Client error: Bad Request for URL`

  This error is not solvable from Odoo; it is advised you reach out to the SUNAT and verify the
  user. It may be necessary to create a new user.

- `Invalid content was found starting with element 'cac:BuyerCustomerParty'`

  This error occurs when the transfer reason is set as *other*. Please select another option.
  According to the official documentation of the SUNAT's waybill guide, the transfer reason *03
  (sale with shipment to third party)* or *12 (others)* will not work correctly in Odoo, since you
  should not have an empty or blank customer.
- `Duda cliente: consumo de créditos IAP al usar GRE 2.0`

  For live clients using IAP, no credit is consumed (in theory) because it does not go through the
  OSE, i.e. these documents are directly sent to the SUNAT.
- `Errores con formato credenciales GRE 2.0 (traceback error)`

  Odoo currently throws an error with a traceback, instead of a message that the credentials are not
  correctly configured in the database. If this occurs on your database, please verify your
  credentials.s occurs on your database, please verify your credentials.
```

you can also create debit Notes. For this just use the button “Add Debit Note”.

By default the Debit Note is set in the document type.

Electronic delivery guide 2.0
-----------------------------

The *Guía de Remisión Electrónica* (GRE) delivery guide is an electronic document generated by the
shipper to support the transportation or transfer of goods from one place to another, such as a
warehouse or establishment. In Odoo, there are several steps needed in configurations before you can
successfully use this feature.

The use of the guía de remisión electrónica electronic document is mandatory and required by SUNAT
for taxpayers who need to transfer their products, with the exception of those under the *Single
Simplified Regime* (régimen único simplificado or RUS).

Delivery guide types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sender
******

The *Sender* delivery guide type is issued when a sale is made, a service is rendered (including
processing), goods are assigned for use or goods are transferred between premises of the same
company and others.

> This delivery guide is issued by the owner of the goods (i.e. the sender) at the beginning of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This delivery guide is issued by the owner of the goods (i.e., the sender) at the beginning of the
```

shipment. The sender delivery guide is supported in Odoo.

.. seealso::
   `SUNAT guía de remisión <https://www.gob.pe/7899-guia-de-remision>`_

Carrier
*******

The *Carrier* delivery guide type justifies the transportation service performed by the driver (or
carrier).

This delivery guide is issued by the carrier and must be issued to each shipper when the shipment
goes through public transport.

.. important::
   The carrier delivery guide is **not** supported in Odoo.

.. seealso::
   `SUNAT guía de remisión transportista
   <https://tefacturo.pe/blog/sunat/guia-de-remision-electronica/guia-de-remision-transportista/>`_

Transportation types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Private
*******

> The *Private* transportation type option is used when the transfer of goods is carried out by the
> owner with their own vehicles. In this case, a sender's delivery guide must be issued.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The *Private* transportation type option is used when the owner carries out the transfer of goods with their own vehicles. In this case, a sender's delivery guide must be issued.
```

Public
******

> This *Public* transportation type option is used when the goods are moved by an external carrier. In

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The *Public* transportation type option is used when the goods are moved by an external carrier. In
```

> this case, two delivery guides must be issued; the sender's delivery guide and the carrier's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this case, two delivery guides must be issued: the sender's delivery guide and the carrier's
```

New required information
************************

Version 2.0 requires additional information in the general configuration as well as vehicles,
contacts, and products. In the general configurations, it is now necessary to add new credentials
that are acquired in the SUNAT portal.

Flow
****

.. image:: peru/peru-flow-remision.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Flow for Guia de Remision emission.

#. Generate sales order
#. Validate delivery order
#. Generate waybill
#. Perform validation or rejection
#. Send CDR
#. Receive validated CDR on outbound order
#. Carrier travels with printed GRE
#. Deliver goods

Cancellations
*************

Currently, the SUNAT no longer uses the term "Anula", but now uses the term "Dar de baja" for
cancellations. Therefore, **both** the sender and the carrier can cancel the electronic waybill, so
long as the following conditions are met:

- The shipment has not been initiated.
- If the shipment has been initiated, the receiver **must** be changed before reaching the final
  destination.

Testing
*******

The SUNAT did not release a test environment. This means that any delivery guides that were
generated by mistake **will** be sent to the SUNAT.

> If by mistake the waybill was created in this environment, it is necessary to delete it from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If, by mistake, the waybill was created in this environment, it is necessary to delete it from the
```

SUNAT portal.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
   - Electronic sender's waybill is currently the only supported type of waybill in Odoo.
   - The delivery guide is dependant on the Odoo *Inventory* app, the :guilabel:`l10n_pe_edi` and
     :guilabel:`l10n_pe` modules.
   - A second user **must** be added for the creation of electronic documents.

After following the steps to configure the :ref:`electronic invoicing <peru/accounting-settings>`
and the :ref:`master data <peru/master_data>`, navigate to :menuselection:`Apps` and clear any
default filters set. Search for the `l10n_pe_edi_stock_20` module and click the :guilabel:`Activate`
button.

Next, you will need to obtain the *client ID* and *client secret* from SUNAT. To do so, follow the
`manual de servicios web plataforma nueva GRE
<https://cpe.sunat.gob.pe/sites/default/files/inline-files/Manual_Servicios_GRE.pdf>`_.

.. note::

>    In the SUNAT portal, it is important to have the correct access rights enabled as it may differ

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In the SUNAT portal, it is important to have the correct access rights enabled, as they may differ
```

.. note::
   It is required to follow the format `RUC + UsuarioSol` (e.g `20557912879SOLUSER`) for the
   :guilabel:`Guide SOL User` field, depending on the user selected when generating the :abbr:`GRE
   (Guía de Remisión Electrónica)` API credentials in the SUNAT portal.

.. image:: peru/gre-fields-example.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Example for the SUNAT Delivery Guide API section configuration.

Operator
********

The *operator* is the driver of the vehicle in cases where the delivery guide is through *private*
transport.

To create a new operator, navigate to :menuselection:`Contacts --> Create` and fill out the contact
information.

First, select :guilabel:`Individual` as the :guilabel:`Company Type`. Then, add the
:guilabel:`Operator License` in the :guilabel:`Accounting` tab of the contact form.

For the customer address, make sure the following fields are complete:

- :guilabel:`District`
- :guilabel:`Tax ID` (:guilabel:`DNI`/:guilabel:`RUC`)
- :guilabel:`Tax ID Number`

.. image:: peru/operator-configuration.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Individual type operator configurations in the Contact form.

Carrier
*******

> The *carrier* is used in the case where the delivery guide is through *public* transport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The *carrier* is used  when the delivery guide is through *public* transport.
```

To create a new carrier, navigate to :menuselection:`Contacts --> Create` and fill out the contact
information.

First, select :guilabel:`Company` as the :guilabel:`Company Type`. Then, add the :guilabel:`MTC
Registration Number`, :guilabel:`Authorization Issuing Entity`, and the :guilabel:`Authorization
Number`.

For the company address, make sure the following fields are complete:

- :guilabel:`District`
- :guilabel:`Tax ID` (:guilabel:`DNI`/:guilabel:`RUC`)
- :guilabel:`Tax ID Number`

.. image:: peru/company-operator-configuration.png
   :align: center
   :alt:  Company type operator configurations in the Contact form.

Vehicles
********

To configure the available vehicles, navigate to :menuselection:`Inventory --> Configuration -->
Vehicles` and fill in the vehicle form with the information needed for the vehicle:

- :guilabel:`Vehicle Name`
- :guilabel:`License Plate`
- :guilabel:`Is M1 or L?`
- :guilabel:`Special Authorization Issuing Entity`
- :guilabel:`Authorization Number`
- :guilabel:`Default Operator`
- :guilabel:`Company`

.. important::

>    It is important to check the :guilabel:`Is M1 or L?` checkbox if the vehicle has less than 4
>    wheels or less than 8 seats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   It is important to check the :guilabel:`Is M1 or L?` checkbox if the vehicle has less than four
   wheels or less than eight seats.
```

  "Peso"" en el producto`

  This error occurs when the weight on the product is set as `0.00`. To fix this, you will need to
  cancel the waybill and recreate it. Make sure that you fix the weight on the product before
  creating the new waybill, or it will result in the same error.
- `JSONDecodeError: Expecting value: line 1 column 1 (char 0) when creating a Delivery Guide`

  This error is typically generated due to SOL user issues. Verify the user's connection with the
  SUNAT; the SOL user must be established with the company RUT + user ID. For example:
  `2012188549JOHNSMITH`.
- `El número de documento relacionado al traslado de mercancía no cumple con el formato establecido:
  error: documento relacionado`

  The *Related Document Type* and *Related Document Number* fields only apply to invoices and
  receipts.
- `400 Client error: Bad Request for URL`

  This error is not solvable from Odoo; it is advised you reach out to the SUNAT and verify the
  user. It may be necessary to create a new user.

- `Invalid content was found starting with element 'cac:BuyerCustomerParty'`

  This error occurs when the transfer reason is set as *other*. Please select another option.

>   According to the official documentation of the SUNAT's waybill guide, the transfer reason *03

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  According to the official documentation of the SUNAT's waybill guide, the transfer reasons *03
```

  (sale with shipment to third party)* or *12 (others)* will not work correctly in Odoo, since you
  should not have an empty or blank customer.
- `Duda cliente: consumo de créditos IAP al usar GRE 2.0`

  For live clients using IAP, no credit is consumed (in theory) because it does not go through the

>   OSE, i.e. these documents are directly sent to the SUNAT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  OSE, i.e., these documents are directly sent to the SUNAT.
```

By default the Debit Note is set in the document type.

> Guia de remision remitente 2.0

Author: This should be changed for english into "Electronic delivery guide 2.0"

************************

Version 2.0 requires additional information in the general configuration as well as vehicles,
contacts, and products. In the general configurations, it is now necessary to add new credentials
that are acquired in the SUNAT portal.

Flow
****

.. image:: peru/peru_flow_remision.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Flow for Guia de Remision emission

Cancellations
*************

Currently, the SUNAT no longer uses the term "Anula", but now uses the term "Dar de baja" for
cancellations. Therefore, **both** the sender and the carrier can cancel the electronic waybill, so
long as the following conditions are met:

- The shipment has not been initiated.
- If the shipment has been initiated, the receiver **must** be changed before reaching the final
  destination.

Testing
*******

The SUNAT did not release a test environment. This means that any delivery guides that were
generated by mistake **will** be sent to the SUNAT.

If by mistake the waybill was created in this environment, it is necessary to delete it from the
SUNAT portal.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
   - Electronic sender's waybill is currently the only supported type of waybill in Odoo.

>    - The delivery guide is dependant on the Odoo *Inventory* app, the :guilabel:`l10n_pe_edi` and

Author: ![image](https://github.com/odoo/documentation/assets/89666460/6889881c-0aca-4574-8651-5564f0fb49da)

"and l10n_pe modules" should be inside the important block

Transportation types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Private
*******

The *Private* transportation type option is used when the owner carries out the transfer of goods
using their own vehicles. In this case, a sender's delivery guide must be issued.

Public
******

The *Public* transportation type option is used when an external carrier moves the goods. In
this case, two delivery guides must be issued: the sender's delivery guide and the carrier's
delivery guide.

Changes in version 2.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes have been made in version 2.0 of the |GRE| delivery guide.

Direct submission to SUNAT
**************************

The creation of the |GRE| delivery guide in Odoo **must** be sent directly to the |SUNAT|,
regardless of the electronic document provider: IAP, Digiflow or |SUNAT|.

New required information
************************

Version 2.0 requires additional information on the general configuration, vehicles, contacts, and
products. In the general configurations, it is now necessary to add new credentials that are
acquired in the |SUNAT| portal.

Flow
****

.. image:: peru/peru-flow-remision.png
   :align: center

>    :alt: Flow for Guia de Remision emission.

Reviewer 3: Would it be possible just to have the flow (with little more details if necessary) without the picture? My concern is that I'm not sure where the picture comes from if you made it or found it, and if anything in the process changes in the next version it might be challenging to keep up with such screenshots.

Author: Hello @chiaraprattico @masi-odoo after some review with the Peru localization expert we concluded the "Flow" section could be deprecated, since the screenshot and the steps are redundant to the documentation itself. The steps are already explained in other sections. Thanks!

#. Generate sales order
#. Validate delivery order
#. Generate waybill
#. Perform validation or rejection
#. Send CDR
#. Receive validated CDR on outbound order
#. Carrier travels with printed |GRE|
#. Deliver goods

Cancellations
*************

> Currently, the |SUNAT| no longer uses the term "Anula", but now uses the term "Dar de baja" for

Reviewer 3: Is it currently in version 16?  will this PR also be implemented for the next versions? I find using currently misleading. We need to keep this factual and not refer to versions, since the users can select the version, they know what you're referring to

Author: Hello @chiaraprattico @samueljlieber the word "currently" is not referring to Odoo versions, but a change in SUNAT's terminology. It is mostly related to the term that its used now and clarifies why in Odoo will use the "current" term which is "Dar de baja"

Author: Hello @samueljlieber and @jcs-odoo I agree we can delete the first note regarding the past and present terms for cancellations.
Nevertheless I recommend adding an "Important" block at the end of the Cancellations section to clarify (I will add this in the correct section).
On the other hand the information regarding when it is possible for the sender/carrier to cancel the document is the policy to follow when cancelling in the SUNAT portal

|SUNAT| portal.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
   - Electronic sender's |GRE| is currently the only supported type of waybill in Odoo.
   - The delivery guide is dependent on the Odoo *Inventory* app, the :guilabel:`l10n_pe_edi` and
     :guilabel:`l10n_pe` modules.
   - A second user **must** be added for the creation of electronic documents.

After following the steps to configure the :ref:`electronic invoicing <peru/accounting-settings>`
and the :ref:`master data <peru/master_data>`, navigate to :menuselection:`Apps` and clear any
default filters set. Search for the `l10n_pe_edi_stock_20` module and click the :guilabel:`Activate`
button.

Next, you will need to obtain the *client ID* and *client secret* from |SUNAT|. To do so, follow the
`manual de servicios web plataforma nueva GRE
<https://cpe.sunat.gob.pe/sites/default/files/inline-files/Manual_Servicios_GRE.pdf>`_.

.. note::
   In the |SUNAT| portal, it is important to have the correct access rights enabled, as they may
   differ from the user set for electronic invoicing.

These credentials should be used to configure the delivery guide general settings from

> :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings --> Peruvian Electronic Invoicing`.

Reviewer 3: I'd put these two lines before the note above, so it goes with the rest of the flow.

.. note::
   It is required to follow the format `RUC + UsuarioSol` (e.g `20557912879SOLUSER`) for the
   :guilabel:`Guide SOL User` field, depending on the user selected when generating the |GRE| API
   credentials in the |SUNAT| portal.

.. image:: peru/gre-fields-example.png
   :align: center

>    :alt: Example for the SUNAT Delivery Guide API section configuration.

Reviewer 3: to which paragraph does this refer to? is this under ':menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings --> Peruvian Electronic Invoicing`.' if so then disregard my previous comment and I'd put the explaining paragraph related to the screenshot closer.

Operator
********

> The *operator* is the driver of the vehicle in cases where the delivery guide is through *private*

Reviewer 3: The *operator* is the vehicle's driver in cases where the delivery guide is through *private*

Author: Hello @chiaraprattico @samueljlieber I agree also with this change. Thanks for the feedback!

:guilabel:`Partida Arancelaria` (Tariff Item) field needs to be completed.

Generating a GRE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the delivery from inventory is created during the sales workflow, make sure you complete the
|GRE| fields on the top-right section of the transfer form for the fields:

- :guilabel:`Transport Type`
- :guilabel:`Reason for Transfer`
- :guilabel:`Departure start date`

It is also required to complete the :guilabel:`Vehicle` and :guilabel:`Operator` fields under the
:guilabel:`Guia de Remision PE` tab.

The delivery transfer has to be marked as *Done* for the :guilabel:`Generar Guia de Remision` button
to appear on the left menu of the transfer form.

.. image:: peru/generate-gre-transferview.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Generar Guia de Remision button on a transfer form in the Done stage.

Once the transfer form is correctly validated by |SUNAT|, you will see the XML file generated in the
chatter. You can now print the delivery slip that will show the transfer details and the QR code
validated by |SUNAT|.

.. image:: peru/gre-delivery-slip.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Transfer details and QR code on generated delivery slip.

Common errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - `Diferente prefijo para productos (T001 en algunos, T002 en otros)`

Reviewer 3: I guess such errors happen on dbs set in Spanish but for consistency, I'd write everything in English even though it will get translated later.
Though you might have some other reason behind that, let me know

Author: Hello @chiaraprattico @samueljlieber We documented them in Spanish because nevertheless those errors are sent from SUNAT (the fiscal entity in Peru) and the errors will always show up in spanish in the DB (even if the DB is in another language). I think this adds more value in spanish, since they could search the documentation just as the error appears in the DB. Let me know what you think!
